<h2>Citibike & Gender, the analysis</h2>
In this assigment, I had to select and analyze data from the Citi Bike Trip History Log, looking for unexpected phenomena. I decided to select data from the months of June, July, and August from both 2019 and 2020. I chose these dataset timeframes because I thought it would be interesting to compare ridership the summer before and the summer after the pandemic had started. I also decided to look at ridership specifically through the lense of gender, as I imagined this variable is analyzed less frequently and I was personally curious to see what I would find in relation to the pandemic's impact. Before any analysis began, I downloaded the six CVS files, used Pandas to read them in as dataframes, and then joined them to make one large dataframe for analysis. I had to delete the CSVs from my local repo before uploading to GitHub because they were too big.
<br></br>
The first set visualizations I looked at were for number of riders broken down by gender accross both summers, as well as ride duration. <b>My first unexpected phenomena was that, although men had the most overall number of rides, their ride count and trip duration went down after the pandemic hit. Conversely, women and unknown gender saw an increase in ride count and ride duration after the pandemic hit. Even more interestingly, women had the longest rides overall.</b> I found this interesting because I would have expected the men to have the longest rides, given that they had so many more rides. It would be hard to reasonably speculate why this trend exists without more data, but we do know that the lifestyle of New Yorkers did change after the pandemic hit, and this effect can be seen in the gender breakdown of rides and duration of rides.
<br></br>
The second set of visualizations I looked at were regarding the start and stop times of bike rides broken down by gender. Both start and stop times for rides were impacted by the pandemic fairly uniformly, regardless gender. In both start and stop times, there was a clear morning and evening communte for both men and women prior to the pandemic. We see that the morning commute spike is mostly gone after the pandemic started with a steady increase in rides throughout the day. Another unexpected phenomena here was that men and women seemed to start and stop rides at relatively the same times. I would have expected non-male riders to stop riding earlier for potential safety reasons.
<br></br>
The third set of visualizations I looked at were regarding age, year, and gender. An unexpected and telling finding here was that the "unknown" gender group was the oldest group by far in the dataset. This likely revealed that the dataset was skewed due to what could likely be older folks not wanting to or not knowing how to add their identified gender. I did also see that the average age of ridership did not change from before and after the pandemic started. I would suggest that Citibike try to include a gender non-binary option when collecting data, so gender unknown does not also include other gender identities.
<br></br>
Lastly, the final visualization I looked at parsed out station popularity by gender accross the whole dataset, not directly looking at the pandemic's impact on ridership. An unexpected finding here was that the top stations were different broken down by gender. The top station for women was West St. and Chambers St. For men it was Pershing Square North by a significant margin. For gender unknown it was 12 Ave and West 40 St. Citibike could use this data in a variety of ways. They could provide more monitoring at popular stations for non-males should safety be of concern (I don't personally have access to how safe riders feel going to and from locations, but this would be an interesting future area to collect data on). They could also potentially arrange to have more assistance on hand at the popular stations for gender unknown as this group tends to be older and might have a harder time getting set up.
<br></br>
I did include my map of rides as my last slide, should that be of interest to anyone viewing. Overall, it is clear that the pandemic did have some impact on ridership when broken down by gender, and it would be interesting to collect cleaner and more specific gender-based data going forward to learn more about ridership through the lense of gender.
